So typically,
we are going to use addEventListener.
And also, addEventListener supports
more advanced event handling.
For example, we can pass a third
argument with some options.
For example, one option is once,
that by default this is false.
So typically, we set it as true.
That means that the event
will be fired once.
After it was fired once, the eventHandler
will be removed automatically.
So if you add these to a click
eventHandler on your button,
you click once you execute the handler.
You click again, nothing will happen,
because the event was removed.
Yeah, it's not suitable for a button,
but it might be suitable for
other situations where you're
expecting that to happen once.
So then you don't need to think
about removing the EventListener
about leaking options, blah, blah, blah.
Passive, I will try to
explain it really quickly.
If you don't get it, it's fine, okay?
But let me explain that with a scroll,
since the simplest
example is with a scroll.
Remember that I mentioned that we
are sharing the thread between my code and
the browser, but it has to do with that.
So what happens, for example,
if you are scrolling with your finger,
you are scrolling your phone with your
finger, and there is a scroll event, so
you can know when the user
is scrolling the page.
But then, in the JavaScript code,
you are taking too much time from the CPU.
Well, the browser has no time,
to actually show the page moving while
you're moving your finger when you
are dragging your finger, okay?
So because by default,
the browser will wait for
your eventHandler to see if
you are changing the DOM.
If you are changing the DOM,
then it needs to repaint,
re-layout before actually moving
the layer, something like that.
When you say passive, true, you are kind
of saying, hey, browser, you can safely do
whatever you wanna do on the screen
that I'm not going to change the DOM.
I'm simplifying this a lot, but just to
give you an idea of what this is, okay?
So it's like saying, hey, you can
execute my EventListener passively,
so don't wait for
it to finish before doing your stuff.
It something like that, it's more complex
than that, but just to give you an idea.
Anyway, there is an option the third
argument where you can execute some code.
And also, we have removeEventListener.
Why do you wanna remove EventListeners?
Well, to avoid having connections
to things that you're not going to
use anymore.
This is only useful when you
are doing a single-page application,
and you are adding and
removing elements on the page.
Because I don't need to remove
the EventListener for DOM content loader.
Or if you have a button or a link but
it's always on the screen,
I don't need to unload my page.
Because when the user is getting out of my
page navigation or closing the browser,
I don't need to clean up my JavaScript,
everything will happen automatically.
We don't clean up the Web app for
when the user gets out.
That's not how a Web app works, okay?
So we use these only when we
are injecting and removing elements.
And we don't wanna get a lot of functions
in memory that we don't use anymore.
Does it make sense?
That's kind of the idea.
And this is actually pretty cool.
And it's an underused feature
that we're going to use it later.
We can dispatch our own events.
And not just for our own components
that we haven't created yet.
We can dispatch events in the document,
in the Window object.
So you create a new event
with your own name, and
you're not forced to follow
the lowercase guideline.
So it's just a string, and
dispatch that event over an element.
And that element can be a button,
or it can be the document.
So you can broadcast events
through the DOM API for
anyone that wants to listen for
that event.
Now, think about React Angular.
This is kind of a context where you
can dispatch events over the context,
and anyone in the DOM can
subscribe with a provider,
and that's kind of that idea.
So we can dispatch events
from anywhere in the page,
and anyone can listen for those events.
And that event is a JavaScript object,
so we can attach properties to it,
metadata, or
we can even extend from event.
We can create our own class,
extending from event
with our own interface for
that event, okay?
So we can hook into the DOM event API.
I'm not saying that you must use that,
or you should always use this.
It's just one technique that
we have available when you're
doing Vanilla JS, okay?
Cool, do you have any question?
Yeah.
>> I have two actually.
So did you say that when DOM nodes
are removed from the DOM specifically,
that the EventListeners aren't removed?
Do you have to remove them manually?
>> Let's review that part, because
there are several possibilities here.
So if you remove an element from the DOM,
do we need to remove the EventListeners?
It depends on what you wanna do.
Because removing an element
from the DOM doesn't mean
that you are not going to
use that element anymore.
It means that you don't want
it on the screen right now.
So remember,
a DOM element is a JavaScript object.
It can be attached to the DOM or not.
Maybe we can say, okay, what happens if
we delete that object, that DOM element?
And that's a different situation.
But removing something from the DOM
doesn't mean that you're throwing it away.
You can still save that DOM element for
later usage.
So then you don't wanna maybe
remove the EventListeners,
because on the lifecycle of that element,
you will still use it later.
Okay, makes sense?
So, the thing is that, if you're not
going to use that element anymore,
or if you delete the reference,
you use the delete keyword in
JavaScript, what will happen
with the EventListener?
Actually, it depends.
It's not even a clear answer,
because it depends
if you also have that EventListener
hooked somewhere else or not.
So it's not so complicated, but
it is complicated actually.
It's not so simple.
But something that you can do is to
manage that yourself and say, okay,
I'm going to remove the EventListener for
that element.
But more important is that when you
don't need that EventListener anymore,
let's say you have a button,
you have a help button, okay,
that is on your page all the time,
but then you log out.
When you log out, you need to
remove an EventListener from it.
Because now you are logged out,
you don't wanna open a chat
that connects to your account,
because now you are logged out.
The button is still there, so you are not
removing the button from the DOM.
It's not about the element itself,
it's about the use case.
Now, there are one or more event listens
over that element that is still on
the screen that you don't need anymore.
So you remove the EventListener.
That use case is more common, make sense?
But yeah, the other problem is
what happens with typically custom
elements that we put on the screen, and
then we'll remove from the screen and
we won't use anymore later, okay?
Cool, any other question?
>> I have one more actually.
>> Yeah, sure.
>> When you have multiple EventListeners
for one event like load for example.
>> Yeah.
>> Did they fire synchronously
one after the other or?
>> In JavaScript, nothing.
So it depends on what
you mean by synchronous.
But I guess that you're you're saying
if they being fired in parallel, okay,
or something like that.
In JavaScript, by default,
you have only one thread.
So nothing will happen in parallel,
nothing.
So no matter the question, everything
will happen sequentially, in sequence.
So in this case,
when you have several EventListeners
hooked to the same element
on the same event,
the system will fire them in sequence,
okay?
And if you need to do things in parallel,
in those EventHandlers,
you need to work with workers,
web workers.
But that's something that
you make on your own.
It's not going to work automatically,
okay?
But JavaScript is single
threaded by default, sorry.
>> Is there a limit to how many
EventListeners can be honored?
>> That's a good question.
If they're limited,
how many EventListeners can you hook?
Actually, it depends on
the implementation of every browser.
I think there was someone doing a test,
and
some browsers were crashing after 5000 or
something that.
But I mean, in the real world, no.
But there is always a limit,
because it has to do with memory and
browsers implementations.
But I'm not pretty sure right now, but I
don't think there is a limit in the spec.
So but yeah, each browser might
implement the things differently.
So they might have their own limits or
something like that,
creating a DOM exception
when that happens.
But it's not happening in the real world,
okay?
Even really complex VR, games,
somethings won't get into
that level of problems.